# Prospectus for “The Long Now of Ulysses”

Co-curated by Jentery Sayers, Stephen Ross, and English 507 (Spring 2013)

Author: Stephen Ross

## Rationale

“The Long Now of Ulysses” takes the modernist fascination with time and space as its
cornerstone, using James Joyce’s modernist masterpiece Ulysses as a springboard for
presentation of a rich context of historical, cultural, and aesthetic materials in a range
of media. It will introduce visitors to the broad contexts of modernism even as it brings
to light both the everyday content and the avant-garde stylistic dimensions of the novel.
The exhibit takes Ulysses as its starting point for several reasons: we have it and are
concluding the first-ever publication of it online, it’s perhaps the sine qua non of high
modernist literary production (barring only The Waste Land), and it was at the very center
of a dizzyingly productive time and place -- Paris in the 1910s and 1920s -- and formed
part of the context for, and was contextualised by, virtually every significant aspect of
modernist cultural production. As such, we will exhibit the text not simply an instance of
modernism, but as its key metonym: the part that can stand for the whole, directing us out
from its centrality to the rich context in which it emerged and which it in turn helped
shape. In this respect, and as the ongoing fascination with modernist aesthetics
demonstrates (e.g.,the popularity of Mad Men, the recent worldwide tour of the Vorticist
exhibit), we remain firmly in the long now of Ulysses even today. This exhibit will extend
this long now across media, times, and places to suggest ways in which we might still
treat Ulysses as a springboard into the cultures of modernity and even postmodernity.

## Curation

The exhibit will be co-curated by Drs. Jentery Sayers and Ross, who will oversee the
creative and collaborative contributions of the graduate students in Dr. Sayers' English
507 course (“Digital Studies”). The students will be responsible for developing the
exhibit methodologies including some use of intelligent environments, design,
mobilization, and outreach and engagement. The faculty will be responsible for the content
of the exhibit, and will provide content expertise, including selecting the materials to
be displayed.

## Organization

The exhibit is organized into seventeen panels corresponding to the seventeen display
cabinet sections arranged around the perimeter of the exhibit space, and in the six
display cabinet sections located in the centre of the space. Each of the perimeter panels
corresponds with an hour in the novel, whose episodes occur in approximately one-hour
increments. The first panel will do double duty, displaying the hour of 8:00 am which is
narrated twice in episodes 1 and 4 (first from Stephen Dedalus’s perspective and then from
Leopold Bloom’s). The remaining panels will each correspond to a different hour and
episode of the novel.

## Perimeter Panels

Each of the perimeter panels will be arranged around a large blow-up of twenty-two lines
from a page in the novel. The pages have been chosen by applying an algorithm to the 1922
first edition of the novel as follows: given that the novel is set on June 16, 1904 and
was published in 1922, we have taken 6, 16, and 22 as significant numbers. Starting with
the first page of each episode, we counted six pages in and sixteen lines down from the
top of the page to begin the excerpts we’ll blow up, and then excerpted 22 lines of text
for the poster. This approach means that each panel is constituted by a given text whose
significance is the product of a random process, just as modernist works of art
increasingly turned to the everyday random experience of the city and rapid-fire
technologies for their subject matter. Just as life itself began to feel as though it was
blurring for many of the modernists in the first half of the twentieth century, so their
works reflected an increased pace in which what Virginia Woolf called “moments of being”
were more and more often accidental -- and accidents came to seem more and more
significant of a higher order hidden behind superficial chaos. Our method of selecting the
passages to blow up for the exhibit mimics this experience, treating Ulysses itself as an
apparently chaotic welter from which order and significance can be extracted even when --
perhaps especially when -- the particular encounter is itself randomized.

The blown-up text is only a springboard, an anchor, for each panel, though, and the
exhibit places a premium upon moving beyond the textual alone in its displays. As the
attached layout indicates, each panel will feature contextual materials that call out from
the posterized excerpts:

1. using a quotation from later in the book and/or a later work that evokes it, we will
provide historical context for the passage, the novel, and modernism more broadly. Format:
text and/or reproduced photographs or images. 2. we will link the passage to a character
in the novel, his or her historical basis, and the broader network of modernist cultural
production in which they participated (and which participated in the production of Ulysses
by proxy) 3. a visual art work that corresponds or evokes/is evoked by the passage will be
hung proximate to the blown-up excerpt from the novel; these works will be selected
primarily from the UVAC for their aesthetic correspondence and/or their implication in the
network of cultural production that circulated around Joyce and his Ulysses. The Gisèle
Freund photographs of Paris in the 1920s and 1930s will be of particular interest here, as
will the UVAC's Klimt silkscreen and other materials in that vein (all depending upon
availability and permission). 4. an object or artifact that has been reproduced in 3D;
these objects will be selected based upon their appearance in the novel, their contextual
importance, and their interest factor as historical objects. We will model the objects
from existing digital models/scans or scan objects from museum collections to which we
have been given access (including UVAC) for this purpose. The objects will be printed on a
MakerBot 3D printer (housed in the Maker Lab at UVic) in a resinous material, meaning that
they can be freely handled by visitors to the exhibit without fear of damage or loss
(should either occur, we will simply print replacements).   5. sounds/music that
correspond to the contexts will be available for playback. These will include historical
recordings of soundscapes from the early twentieth century as well as songs, music,
voices, readings, and machines. 6. other texts that are evoked by/evoke the blown-up
passage will themselves be presented in smaller blow-up excerpts and, where possible, in
the original or rare editions held by Special Collections (in the locked display cases).
At a minimum these will include rare editions of Ulysses, but also works by Wyndham Lewis,
T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, John Betjeman, Herbert Read, Amelia Laracuen, letters, diaries,
advertisements, newspaper pages (we have the 1904 Freeman, e.g.), etc.  

## Center Cabinets

The six cabinets located in the center of the space are organized according to the
principle of unanticipated afterlives. They will feature works in which artists and
critics have taken up Ulysses and its contexts in ways Joyce could not have anticipated:
digital manifestations, cinematic renderings, live performances, architectural designs,
artistic appropriations, inventive maps, music, etc.

##Outreach, Engagement, and Education

The exhibit will extend beyond the Maltwood Gallery into a digital environment to engage
vistors in an interactive and educational enterprise. Integrating the exhibit's artifacts
with multimodal technologies, English 507 students will design an interactive, open-access
web space designed to engage the diverse learning needs of a broad audience. Providing
individuals and learning communities with meaningful opportunities to interact with the
textual and contextual histories and futures of Ulysses, modernism, and The Long Now, this
digital interface extends the temporal and spacial themes of the exhibit while taking
advantage of the limitless potential of the web to connect and engage both local and
distant audiences.

We will collaborate with the UVic Library and the UVic Communications team to reach the
academic community. The exhibit and online extension will be promoted to the university
community through  UVic Congress and Digital Humanities Summer Insistute (DHSI). To reach
an audience beyond the University community, we will invite teachers in the local school
districts to visit the exhibit with their students and access the online materials to
extend the learning experience into the classroom. We will also invite the Greater
Victoria Public Library to (at minimum) feature a link to the Long Now of Ulysses web
space on thier website and (at best) create a sister exhibit to capture the interest of a
broader community audience.

